# sql-challenge
# Unit 9 Homework: Employee Database

## Assignment Overview

As a new data engineer at Pewlett Hackard, I have been assigned to research on employees of the corporation from the 1980s and 1990s. All that remains of the database of employees from that period are six CSV files.

## Methodology
In this assignment, designed the tables to hold data in the CSVs, imported the CSVs into a SQL database, and answered questions about the data. In other words, performed **data modeling**, **data engineering**, and **data analysis**.

### Data Modeling

Inspected the CSVs and sketched out an ERD (Entity Relationship Diagram) of the tables using [http://www.quickdatabasediagrams.com](http://www.quickdatabasediagrams.com). After carefull inspection of CSV files, following relationship was established between the tables :
1. Employee : Title = Multiple : One (multiple employees have same title)
2. Employee : Salaries = Multiple : One (Multiple employees have same salary)
3. Employee : Department_Employee = Multiple : One (multiple employees in one department)
4. Employee : Department_Manager = Multiple : One (multiple manager in one department)
5. Departments : Department_Employee = One : Multiple (one department has multiple employees)
6. Departments : Department_Manager = One : Multiple (one department has multiple managers)
[EmployeeSQL/SQL_HW_ERD_image.png]


### Data Engineering

* Used the table schema generated by the ERD (specifying data types, primary keys, foreign keys) to create table for each of the six CSV files [EmployeeSQL/SQL_HW_table_schemata.sql]. 

* Imported each CSV file into the corresponding SQL table. 
[EmployeeSQL/images/table_1.png]
[EmployeeSQL/images/table_2.png]
[EmployeeSQL/images/table_3.png]
[EmployeeSQL/images/table_4.png]
[EmployeeSQL/images/table_5.png]
[EmployeeSQL/images/table_6.png]
  

### Data Analysis

Following queries were performed on the  SQL tables [EmployeeSQL/SQL_HW_queries.sql]:

1. List the following details of each employee: employee number, last name, first name, sex, and salary.
[EmployeeSQL/images/query_1.png]

2. List first name, last name, and hire date for employees who were hired in 1986.
[EmployeeSQL/images/query_2.png]

3. List the manager of each department with the following information: department number, department name, the manager's employee number, last name, first name.
[EmployeeSQL/images/query_3.png]

4. List the department of each employee with the following information: employee number, last name, first name, and department name.
[EmployeeSQL/images/query_4.png]

5. List first name, last name, and sex for employees whose first name is "Hercules" and last names begin with "B."
[EmployeeSQL/images/query_5.png]

6. List all employees in the Sales department, including their employee number, last name, first name, and department name.
[EmployeeSQL/images/query_6.png]

7. List all employees in the Sales and Development departments, including their employee number, last name, first name, and department name.
[EmployeeSQL/images/query_7.png]

8. List the frequency count of employee last names (i.e., how many employees share each last name) in descending order.
[EmployeeSQL/images/query_8.png]


## Submission

* Created image file of ERD.

* Created a `.sql` file of table schemata.

* Created a `.sql` file of queries.

## References

Mockaroo, LLC. (2021). Realistic Data Generator. [https://www.mockaroo.com/](https://www.mockaroo.com/)

- - -

© 2022 Trilogy Education Services, a 2U, Inc. brand. All Rights Reserved.

